[blog] Introducing MUI Core v5.0 (#27912)
mui-org/material-ui: docs/pages/blog/mui-core-v5.md

1. **Switching context** wastes time.
   The styled API forces to constantly jump between the usage of the styled components and where they are defined.
   Could we move the style descriptions right where we need them?
2. **Naming things** is hard.
   Have you ever found yourself struggling to find a good name for a styled component?
   Could we remove the need to create and name yet another component?
3. **Enforcing consistency** in UIs is hard.
   This is especially true when more than one person is building the application, as there has to be some coordination amongst members of the team regarding the choice of design tokens and how they are used, what parts of the theme structure should be used with what CSS properties, and so on.

In v5, we have pushed the solution one step further with the `sx` prop.
The prop is now available on **all** the components thanks to the migration away from JSS.
It exposes as a superset of the CSS API, the normal CSS properties, shorthands, and media query helpers.

For instance, you can add two vertical margin units with:

```jsx
// add margin: 16px 0px;

> <Slider sx={{ my: 2 }} />

Author: The description is "you can add two vertical margin units"

> <Slider sx={{ my: 2 }} />

Author: Maybe it should be

"you can add two units of vertical margin"

```

<p class="blog-description"><a href="https://codesandbox.io/s/nostalgic-williams-zmo5r?file=/src/App.js">Codesandbox</a></p>

Developers seem to already [love it](https://twitter.com/AnsonLowZF/status/1397034690771443715).
You can find a [side-by-side comparison](/system/basics/#why-use-the-system) of `styled` vs. `sx` in the documentation to determine when you want to use the prop.
Find where your cursor is. Some developers use it for everything, others with parsimony.

The four components categorized as CSS utilities: Box, Grid, Typography, and Stack also expose a subset of the `sx` prop as flat props, for instance:

```jsx
<Typography color="grey.600">

> ```

Reviewer: perhaps a comparison with the `sx` equivalent would be clearer?

Author: OK

<p class="blog-description"><a href="https://codesandbox.io/s/keen-worker-zo2r3?file=/src/App.tsx">Codesandbox</a></p>

See the [API tradeoff](/system/basics/#api-tradeoff) section of the documentation for why not all the components accept these flat props.

### Dynamic props

React is about composition. Developers can import one component, extend it, and re-export the wrapper.

> It's how developers have extended our core components up until v4. However:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It's how developers have extended the core components up until v4. However:
```

1. Each time you create a new component, it's another import option for your team.

>    Now, you have to enforce that the right component is imported.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Now, you have to ensure that the right component is imported.
```

2. Adding a new `color="success"` prop to a Button component requires non-trivial CSS customizations.
   How do you ensure that all the styles (hover, focus, focus-visible) are consistent with the other built-in colors?
3. It adds a boilerplate.

> It's why v5 comes with the capability to extend the built-in behavior of the components; right from the theme.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For this reason v5 comes with the capability to extend the built-in behavior of the components, right from the theme.
```

> It was one of the most upvoted GitHub issues: [#13875](https://github.com/mui-org/material-ui/issues/13875).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This was one of the most upvoted GitHub issues: [#13875](https://github.com/mui-org/material-ui/issues/13875).
```

  - [The sx prop](#the-sx-prop)
  - [Dynamic props](#dynamic-props)
  - [Global class names](#global-class-names)
  - [Base components (alpha)](#base-components-alpha)
- [Improved DX](#improved-dx)
  - [Smaller demos in the docs](#smaller-demos-in-the-docs)
  - [Props descriptions in IntelliSense](#props-descriptions-in-intellisense)
- [A new product line: X](#a-new-product-line-x)
- [New components](#new-components)
  - [Improved Grid](#improved-grid)
  - [More Material Design icons](#more-material-design-icons)
  - [Stack](#stack)
  - [Promotion from the lab](#promotion-from-the-lab)
  - [New in the lab](#new-in-the-lab)
- [v4 migration](#v4-migration)
  - [Change on the supported platforms](#change-on-the-supported-platforms)
- [Design kits](#design-kits)
- [What's next?](#whats-next)

## High-level goals for v5

In our last survey, [60% fewer](/blog/2020-developer-survey-results/#comparison-with-last-year) developers were complaining about improving Material Design implementation than they did a year before.
At the same time, 400% more developers were struggling to customize the components.

It's the context in which we started working on v5 in 2019.

> Our primary focus was to revamp the **customization DX**.

Reviewer 2: I'd expand the abbreviation the first time it's used.

```suggestion
Our primary focus was to revamp the **customization developer experience (DX)**.
```

It had become clear that design and DX were key to unlock the next stage of growth.

At the same time, the last major iteration on the library was done with MUI v4, released [2.5 years ago](/blog/material-ui-v4-is-out/).
It's a long period not to innovate.
We have approached v5 by focusing on the value it would deliver **long term**.
For instance, we have stopped all development in v4 as soon as we started to work on v5.

> We have taken the liberty to introduce breaking changes anytime we have identified a long-term potential.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We have taken the liberty of introducing breaking changes anytime we have identified a long-term potential.
```

After [exploring](https://github.com/mui-org/material-ui/issues/22342) many different options.
We settled on what we believe is a great tradeoff to **solve** the above issues:

1. We have made `styled` the lowest level primitive to add styles.
   This API is already known by many.
2. We have defined a common interface with concrete implementations:

   - `@mui/styled-engine`: implemented with emotion (default).
   - `@mui/styled-engine-sc`: implemented with styled-components
   - If you are using a different styled engine, feel free to contribute a wrapper. For instance, there is [one attempt with goober](https://github.com/mui-org/material-ui/pull/27776), a library obsessing on bundle size (3kB gzipped).

   This allows developers to swap between different styled engines. For instance, styled-components users do no longer need to bundle emotion **and** styled-component, nor do they need to configure the server-side rendering for each.
   How does the [swap works](/guides/styled-engine/#how-to-switch-to-styled-components)? The same way it does from React to Preact.

> 3. We have started to [sponsor](https://opencollective.com/emotion) emotion with a $1,000/month grant. It's in our best interest to help ensure the library keeps pushing the envelope, staying state of the art in a competitive space.

Reviewer 2: 1000 or 100? The linked open collective page shows the latter

Author: The idea is to increase it to 1,000. Thoughts?

Reviewer 2: I'd say let's write it so: 

```suggestion
3. For the last couple of months we have been [sponsoring](https://opencollective.com/emotion) emotion with a $100/month grant. We are now increasing this amount to $1,000/month. It's in our best interest to help ensure the library keeps pushing the envelope, staying state of the art in a competitive space.
```

The first immediate benefit was at the **performance** level. the `<Box>` component is [x5-x10 more performant](https://codesandbox.io/s/zlh5w?file=/src/App.js) in v5, compared to v4.

> We would like to thanks all the community contributors that made the migration of the components and documentation possible in [#24405](https://github.com/mui-org/material-ui/issues/24405) and [#16947](https://github.com/mui-org/material-ui/issues/16947) @natac13, @vicasas, @mngu, @kodai3, @xs9627, @povilass, @duganbrett, @vinyldarkscratch, and more.

Reviewer 2: Should names be links to the Github profiles? If not, I'd skip the "@"

Author: I have added the links

It was a major undertaking!

> Going forward, developers can either keep using JSS with the legacy `@mui/styles` package [or migrate](/guides/migration-v4/#migrate-makestyles-to-emotion).

Author: I have tried to handle this feedback with https://github.com/mui-org/material-ui/pull/27912

   Could we remove the need to create and name yet another component?
3. **Enforcing consistency** in UIs is hard.
   This is especially true when more than one person is building the application, as there has to be some coordination amongst members of the team regarding the choice of design tokens and how they are used, what parts of the theme structure should be used with what CSS properties, and so on.

In v5, we have pushed the solution one step further with the `sx` prop.
The prop is now available on **all** the components thanks to the migration away from JSS.
It exposes as a superset of the CSS API, the normal CSS properties, shorthands, and media query helpers.

For instance, you can add two vertical margin units with:

```jsx
// add margin: 16px 0px;
<Slider sx={{ my: 2 }} />
```

<p class="blog-description"><a href="https://codesandbox.io/s/nostalgic-williams-zmo5r?file=/src/App.js">Codesandbox</a></p>

Developers seem to already [love it](https://twitter.com/AnsonLowZF/status/1397034690771443715).
You can find a [side-by-side comparison](/system/basics/#why-use-the-system) of `styled` vs. `sx` in the documentation to determine when you want to use the prop.

> Find where your cursor is. Some developers use it for everything, others with parsimony.

Reviewer 2: > Find where your cursor is

😕

> parsimony

This is very likely the first time I see this word ;)

Author: Ok, I have clarified it.

```jsx
<Typography color="grey.600">
```

<p class="blog-description"><a href="https://codesandbox.io/s/keen-worker-zo2r3?file=/src/App.tsx">Codesandbox</a></p>

See the [API tradeoff](/system/basics/#api-tradeoff) section of the documentation for why not all the components accept these flat props.

### Dynamic props

React is about composition. Developers can import one component, extend it, and re-export the wrapper.
It's how developers have extended our core components up until v4. However:

1. Each time you create a new component, it's another import option for your team.
   Now, you have to enforce that the right component is imported.
2. Adding a new `color="success"` prop to a Button component requires non-trivial CSS customizations.
   How do you ensure that all the styles (hover, focus, focus-visible) are consistent with the other built-in colors?
3. It adds a boilerplate.

It's why v5 comes with the capability to extend the built-in behavior of the components; right from the theme.
It was one of the most upvoted GitHub issues: [#13875](https://github.com/mui-org/material-ui/issues/13875).

> In practice, the change makes the MUI Core components extendable placeholders.

Reviewer 2: > MUI Core components

Off topic: we seriously need to reconsider the naming of `@mui/core`...

Author: Yeah, I kept the Core terminology because of https://material-ui.com/components/about-the-lab/#about-the-lab

> The main difference between the lab and the core is how the components are versioned.

**First**, you can use the [existing style mapping](/customization/palette/#adding-new-colors) of the components.

> For instance, you can add a new neutral color to lette. The Button computes the right derivative colors.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For instance, you can add a new neutral color to the palette. The Button computes the right derivative colors.
```

**Second**, you can add [custom variants](/customization/theme-components/#adding-new-component-variants) in the theme, overriding the CSS for specific prop combinations.

```jsx
import { createTheme, Button } from '@mui/material';

// 1. Extend the theme.
const theme = createTheme({
  components: {
    MuiButton: {
      variants: [
        {
          props: { variant: 'dashed', color: 'error' },
          style: {
            border: '1px dashed red',
            color: 'red',
          }
        }
      ]
    }
  }
});

// 2. Update the Button's color prop options
declare module '@mui/material/Button' {
  interface ButtonPropsVariantOverrides {
    dashed: true;
  }
}

// 3. Profit
<Button variant="dashed" color="error">
  dashed
</Button>
```

<p class="blog-description"><a href="https://codesandbox.io/s/sharp-sky-xwz3d?file=/src/App.tsx">Codesandbox</a></p>

### Global class names

In v3, we heard how frustrating using the `classes` prop API correctly can sometimes be.
In v4, we made [a step](/blog/material-ui-v4-is-out/#customization) toward adding global class names.
They are present, as long as no more than one ThemeProvider is used.

> v5 double down on this direction by always adding global class names on the host DOM nodes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
v5 doubles down on this direction by always adding global class names on the host DOM nodes.
```

These class names are available for customizing the child elements.
It can simplify the customization of complex components.

> For instance, compare these tree options to turn the input outlined border color red:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For instance, compare these three options to turn the outlined input's border color red:
```

    borderColor: 'red',
  },
});

// Option 3: classes prop (before)
const CustomizedTextField3 = styled((props) => (
  <TextField
    {...props}
    variant="outlined"
    InputProps={{ classes: { notchedOutline: 'foo' } }}
  />
))({
  '& .foo': {
    borderColor: 'red',
  },
}) as typeof TextField;
```

<p class="blog-description"><a href="https://codesandbox.io/s/zealous-dawn-0yr4g?file=/src/App.tsx">Codesandbox</a></p>

Option 1 is the simplest but if you want more type safety and do not use a magic string (`MuiOutlinedInput-notchedOutline`), you can use Option 2.

### Base components (alpha)

While hooks were high-risk experimentation when React released them in 2018, they are now ubiquitous.
This is a great opportunity for MUI to expose more flexibility: headless components.

A key reason why developers pick MUI is to be able to build UIs faster.
When they depend on us, they make a tradeoff.
They estimate that applying new styles on top of the Material Design components will be faster than creating components from scratch or picking another library.
They estimate that it will be performant enough, and they won't miss too much freedom.

> This tradeoff work **really well** when having a small, constrained engineering team or a large team building internal (/secondary) tools.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This tradeoff works **really well** when having a small, constrained engineering team or a large team building internal (/secondary) tools.
```

But what about the medium/large size engineering team that works on ambitious projects? Shouldn't they have a better option than building the components from scratch to not include Material Design and maximize freedom?

This is this problem that our team started working on.
We are isolating the logic of the Material Design components into hooks and unstyled components.

> While the effort is still in alpha, you can already find the first building blocks in the `@mui/base` package.

Reviewer 2: > `@mui/base`

![I see what you did there](https://media.giphy.com/media/l46CxpYSFoFtN11ug/giphy.gif)

Reviewer 3: At least it's still in alpha we can change it 🤫

Author: Haha, it's the only way I could find to write this section without being confused about the name: https://github.com/mui-org/material-ui/discussions/28271#discussioncomment-1310705.

Author: @mnajdova @michaldudak Let me know how you would like to handle this one. I think that the first question is about the header. Is `### Base components (alpha)` OK? Or should it be `### Core components`?

Reviewer 2: If there is a consensus about calling the package `@mui/base` (I'm ok with it), we can title it `Base components (alpha)`. Another safe option would be `Unstyled components (alpha)`, even if it doesn't match the package name. `Core` is now too overloaded.

If we go with `@mui/base`, we should rename the package as soon as possible, to there's no mismatch between the post and reality.

Reviewer 3: +1 for `Unstyled components (alpha)` - it's descriptive and it doesn't need to match the package name.

> If we go with @mui/base, we should rename the package as soon as possible, to there's no mismatch between the post and reality.

Agree 👍

Reviewer 4: I'm in with whatever you chose, be it Base or Unstyled. Agree that going with Core now is not a good option 😅

Author: I personally fail to see how `@mui/core` can work when the how the product is named MUI Core. I think that most developers would assume that MUI Core === `@mui/core`. But no, MUI Core = `@mui/core` + `@mui/system` + ` @mui/material` + `@mui/joy`

Author: I'm updating the content to use unstyled, for now, to keep the previous terminology

- [Autocomplete](/components/autocomplete/)
- [Pagination](/components/pagination/)
- [Rating](/components/rating/)
- [Skeleton](/components/skeleton/)
- [Speed Dial](/components/speed-dial/)
- [Toggle Buttons](/components/toggle-button/)

### New in the lab

The lab hosts the incubator components that are not yet ready to move to the core.
The main difference between the lab and the core is how the components are versioned.
Having a separate lab package allows us to release breaking changes when necessary while the core package follows a [slower-moving policy](/versions/#release-frequency).

The following components are now available in the lab:

- [LoadingButton](/components/buttons/#loading-buttons). It does what you would expect. It renders the `Button` in a loading/pending state.
- [TrapFocus](/components/trap-focus/). This component traps the focus within a DOM node. For instance, it's used by the Modal for accessibility reasons.
- [Masonry](/components/masonry/). One great use case for this component is when using the `Grid` component leads to wasting space. It's frequently used in dashboards.

>   <a href="/components/masonry/"><img src="/static/blog/mui-core-v5/masonry.png" alt="" style="width: 505px; margin-bottom: 16px;" /></a>

Reviewer 3: Should we maybe use an example with images here?

Author: I didn't because I felt that the [most common](https://docs.google.com/forms/d/1lOfuOc4XWcvbCH6cEcjsrZ7gvyHPzZTeV5_E9Yh-J0s/edit#responses) [use case](https://github.com/mui-org/material-ui/issues/17000) is with dashboards, and that image would be distracting. But not strong point of view.

The best documentation is the one you don't need to open.
We have moved all the props' descriptions to TypeScript, so the IntelliSense in your editor can show you more context.

<img src="/static/blog/mui-core-v5/prop-descriptions.png" alt="" style="width: 649px; margin-bottom: 16px;" />

<p class="blog-description">The popup explains what the <code>forcePopupIcon</code> prop is for.</p>

These TypeScript props' descriptions are also used to generate the [API pages](/api/autocomplete/#props) of the documentation, so there is a single source of truth.

### Migration from Enzyme to Testing Library

- The value? Makes it easier for developers to copy the source, and maintainers to make sure the components are easy to test

### TypeScript migration

- Share our progress https://github.com/mui-org/material-ui/issues/15984
- Covered a bit in https://material-ui.com/blog/2020-q3-update/
- The value? Helps keeping the types as accurate as possible

### Strict Mode support

- Docs, test, etc. now runs in StrictMode
- Warn that `@material-ui/styles` is not compatible

## A new product line: X

- What are the new product separation
- What this product line is about
- Why does it even exist

> - Present the new Data Grid component, hopefully, released as v5.0.0 at the same time.

Reviewer 5: What is the deadline for the release of the v5 of the core ?
For the Grid, I suppose we won't release v5 before mid-October as we only launch the first beta at mid-September and we have a week of partial-break.

Author: > What is the deadline for the release of the v5 of the core ?

Tomorrow, the blog post is about MUI Core now, this comment is about outdated.

```jsx
<Box display="grid" gridTemplateColumns="repeat(12, 1fr)" gap={2}>
  <Box gridColumn="span 8">
    <Item>xs=8</Item>
  </Box>
  <Box gridColumn="span 4">
    <Item>xs=4</Item>
  </Box>
  <Box gridColumn="span 4">
    <Item>xs=4</Item>
  </Box>
  <Box gridColumn="span 8">
    <Item>xs=8</Item>
  </Box>
</Box>
```

### More Material Design icons

The Material Design team at Google has released 600 new icons in five different themes since we released v4.
We have made them [available](/components/material-icons/) in the `@mui/icons-material` package.

### Stack

We have introduced a new `<Stack>` component.
It handles one-dimensional layouts, it's similar to how Figma handles auto-layout.

<a href="/components/stack/"><img src="/static/blog/mui-core-v5/stack.png" alt="" style="width: 532px; margin-bottom: 16px;" /></a>

> Note that you might already be using `<Box display="flex" gap={1}>` to solve the same problem.
> However [browser support](https://caniuse.com/flexbox-gap) for the flexbox `gap` CSS property is lacking in Safari.

You can find [more details](/components/stack/) in the documentation.

### Promotion from the lab

> We have promoted six component from the lab, after over two years iterating on feedback:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
We have moved six components from the lab to the main component package, after over two years iterating on feedback:
```

At first read I did not understand whant "promoting" meant

Author: Haha!

### Date pickers

- Transfer of ownership from third-party to mui-org.

### Data Grid

- See next section
- Covered a bit in https://material-ui.com/blog/2020-q3-update/

## v4 migration

- The high-level changes required
- Installation
- ⚓️ We have introduced a new release line: v4.x.x-deprecations.x. This release line is kept in sync with the latest version of v4 and includes actionable deprecations to ease the migration to v5.
- The codemod, covered a bit in https://material-ui.com/blog/2021-q2-update/
- The migration guide

### Change on the supported platforms

This breaking change is the opportunity to drop the support of legacy upstream dependencies.

- We have updated the minimum supported TypeScript version from 3.2 to **3.5**.
  It aims to match the policy of [DefinitelyTyped](https://github.com/DefinitelyTyped/DefinitelyTyped), with versions of TypeScript that are less than two years old.
- We have updated the minimum supported node.js version from 8.0 to **12.17**.
  It aims to match the [LTS versions that are in maintenance](https://github.com/nodejs/Release#release-schedule) mode.
- We have updated the minimum supported React version from 16.8 to **17.0**.

>   The breaking changes released between the two versions are [minors](https://reactjs.org/blog/2020/10/20/react-v17.html).

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
  The breaking changes released between the two versions are [very limited](https://reactjs.org/blog/2020/10/20/react-v17.html).
```

To avoid confusion between "minor = small scope" and "minor = minor semver release"

- We have updated the browsers support.
  - IE: **partial**. We have kept the logic that we added in the past to support IE 11.
    However, we have stopped active work on it. We can't guarentee that it works correctly. It's discontinued.

>   - Edge: from 14 to **91**. The minimum version is based on Chromium.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
  - Edge: from 14 to **91**. The minimum version based on Chromium.
```

You can keep track of our progress in [#27170](https://github.com/mui-org/material-ui/issues/27170).

Our high-level plan is to use the unstyled components and hooks as a base of Material components.
We are aiming to complete this effort with the next major release (v6).
As of now, you can evaluate the unstyled primitives in the `@mui/base` package or check out the next implementation of the Material Design components in the `@mui/material-next` package (targeted at v6).
Please note that both packages are in an alpha state so we can release breaking changes.
We want to take the opportunity to create the best APIs we possibly can.

You can help us shape these new packages by taking part in discussions.
There are [RFCs](https://github.com/mui-org/material-ui/issues?q=is%3Aopen+label%3Adiscussion+%5BRFC%5D) waiting for responses.
Do not hesitate to let us know what you think.
We highly value the voice of the community, this package is built to serve you.

#### Joy

### X

- Data grid

## Thank you

Finally, one last thank you to everyone who's contributed to MUI v5.
The whole team is very excited about this release! It's just the beginning.

> We will keep working hard on delivering the best possible React UI components while making it accessible to the many.

Author: "accessible to the many" I intended to have a polysemy, the first order is to make it accessible to more developers, with less specific knowledge. the second-order is about the end-users, a11y.

### A public roadmap

It's new, link core and x roadmaps.

### Core

#### Unstyled components and hooks

We still have a lot of work to do to have a great set of unstyled components.
You can keep track of our progress in [#27170](https://github.com/mui-org/material-ui/issues/27170).

Our high-level plan is to use the unstyled components and hooks as the basis of the Material components and second design system.
We are aiming to complete this work with the next major release (v6).
As of now, you can evaluate the unstyled primitives in the `@mui/base` package, or check out the next implementation of the Material Design components in the `@mui/material-next` package (targeted at v6).
Please note that both packages are in an alpha state so that we can release breaking changes –
we want to take the opportunity to create the best APIs we possibly can.

You can help us shape these new packages by taking part in discussions.
There are [RFCs](https://github.com/mui-org/material-ui/issues?q=is%3Aopen+label%3Adiscussion+%5BRFC%5D) waiting for responses.
Don't hesitate to let us know what you think!

#### Joy

### Second design system

> We have started the [discussion](https://github.com/mui-org/material-ui/discussions/27803) about the direction of this product which we aim to grow beyond material design.
> 
> This new design system, codename `Joy`, will be built on top of our strong foundation packages (`unstyled` and `system`) to provide better DX eg. built-in CSS variables generated from theme, perfect dark mode API, etc.
> 
> The plan is to release a set of components in each milestone (ordered by most browse) until it has the same amount of components as `@mui/material`, so that the developers only have to pick a package between material-design and Joy based on the design they want to get started with. Most functionalities and APIs of components will be the same because both design systems are built on top of `@mui/core`. The differences will be the theme structure that we want to achieve the right amount of flexibility and great design out of the box.
> 
> We will keep you posted about the progress, stay tuned.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Developing a new design system is one of the main initiatives, alongside this new brand and the unstyled components, to grow MUI beyond Material Design. Its codename is **Joy** and we have just started [the high-level discussion](https://github.com/mui-org/material-ui/discussions/27803) around it if you want more context. 

It will be built on top of our strong foundation packages (the unstyled components and `system`) to provide a better DX and a different design language. We plan on having built-in CSS variables generated from the theme, a great dark mode API, a custom look and feel, and more.

We're prioritizing developing first the most-searched-for components as we plan on releasing them continuously with each milestone. We intend on having on Joy all the components already available on Material Design so that developers can then pick between them focusing on the design they like the most. The main difference will be at the theme structure, where we want to achieve the right amount of flexibility while providing an amazing design out of the box.

We'll keep you posted about the progress, stay tuned.
```

An overall review of the Joy section :)

- We have updated the minimum supported node.js version from 8.0 to **12.17**.
  This aims to match the [LTS versions that are in maintenance](https://github.com/nodejs/Release#release-schedule) mode.
- We have updated the minimum supported React version from 16.8 to **17.0**.
  The breaking changes released between the two versions are [very limited](https://reactjs.org/blog/2020/10/20/react-v17.html).
- We have updated the supported browsers.
  - IE: **partial**. We have kept the logic added in the past to support IE 11,
    however, we have stopped actively working on it. We can't guarantee that it works correctly. It's discontinued.
  - Edge: from 14 to **91**. The minimum version based on Chromium.
  - Firefox: from 52 to **78**.
  - Chrome: from 49 to **90**. We have [assumed](https://developers.google.com/search/blog/2019/05/the-new-evergreen-googlebot) that Googlebot is always using the latest version of Chrome.
  - Safari: from 10 to **12.5**

These changes have allowed us to save [6 kB gzipped](https://github.com/mui-org/material-ui/pull/22814#issuecomment-700995216) on the `@mui/material` package.

## Design kits

> ```sh
> - Now we have Figma, Adobe XD, and Sketch
> ```

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
We now have the MUI components available in the three main design tools out there: Figma, Sketch, and Adobe XD. If you work together with a team of designers, having them using the UI kits makes for easier communication as you'll be speaking the same language around the components. It'll also help designers to understand how the library is structured, especially theming features and each component prop, enabling a much faster development.
```

## What's next?

```sh
- Retrospective on what we aimed for in v4 and what we delivered
  https://material-ui.com/blog/material-ui-v4-is-out/#whats-next
- Retrospective on our growth in the React community,
  ~25% of the market, aim for 50% by 2025.
  Did a bit of this in https://material-ui.com/blog/2020-q3-update/
- Retrospective on yes, we succesffuly managed to make this effort sustainable
  echos back to https://material-ui.com/blog/material-ui-v4-is-out/#premium-themes-store-%E2%9C%A8
```

### A public roadmap

```sh
- It's new, link core and x roadmaps.
  Can use https://github.blog/2020-07-28-announcing-the-github-public-roadmap/ as inspiration
- Use what come bellow as key effort we want to take on
```

### Unstyled components and hooks

> We still have a lot of work to do to have a full set of unstyled components.
> You can keep track of our progress in [#27170](https://github.com/mui-org/material-ui/issues/27170).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
To continue expanding on the customization effort, we plan to provide a version of the components that contain only the core functionality and accessibility support features, allowing you to add whatever styling strategy you wish. We're just starting and there's a lot of work to do to have a full set of unstyled components. 
```

Following on @flaviendelangle feedback about giving a small description of the unstyled. How about it?

Reviewer 5: Perfect !

> Our high-level plan is to use the unstyled components and hooks as the basis of the Material components and second design system.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Our high-level plan is to use it as the basis of the Material components and second design system.
```

Removing so we don't use 3 instances of _unstyled components_ too close to each other. (If you consider the title and my above suggestion where I'm rapidly explaining them )

Reviewer 3: I wouldn't remove it, the unstyled components were not mentioned in the previous section and it would be hard otherwise to follow on what we are talking about, especially when you read the content for the first time.

Reviewer 4: Oh, it's just because if you get my previous suggestion and see it with the title, we'd have:

> **_Unstyled components_ and hooks**
> To continue expanding on the customization effort, we plan to provide a version of the components that contain only the core functionality and accessibility support features, allowing you to add whatever styling strategy you wish. We're just starting and there's a lot of work to do to have a full set of _unstyled components_. 
>
>Our high-level plan is to use the _unstyled components_ and hooks as the basis of the Material components and second design system.

I figured there were too many _unstyled components_ close to each other 😅

  });

  const classes = {
    active,
    disabled,
    focusVisible,
  };

  return (
    <CustomButtonRoot {...getRootProps()} className={clsx(classes)}>
      {children}
    </CustomButtonRoot>
  );
});
```

<p class="blog-description"><a href="https://codesandbox.io/s/7lc1r?file=/demo.tsx">Codesandbox</a></p>

We discuss the effort in [#6218](https://github.com/mui-org/material-ui/issues/6218).
You can use [#27170](https://github.com/mui-org/material-ui/issues/27170) to follow our progress.

## Improved DX

### Smaller demos in the docs

We have used the migration of the demos from JSS to emotion as an opportunity to rework them.
Many of the demos were originally added taking into account how they would help maintainers work on the components.
Instead, we have reversed the priority, putting the developers using them [first](https://github.com/mui-org/material-ui/issues/22484).

In practice, this means breaking down complex demos into smaller ones.
We aim to have as many "inline previews" as possible. It saves one click to expand the demo, and the mental overhead of figuring out what part of the code maps with what of interest you saw on the screen.

> <a href="/components/buttons/#basic-button"><img src="/static/blog/mui-core-v5/inline-preview.png" alt="" style="width: 649px; margin-bottom: 16px;" /></a>

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
<a href="/components/buttons/#basic-button"><img src="/static/blog/mui-core-v5/inline-preview.png" alt="Screenshot of the new code inline preview in our docs" style="width: 649px; margin-bottom: 16px;" /></a>
```

### Props descriptions in IntelliSense

The best documentation is the one you don't need to open.
We have moved all the prop descriptions to TypeScript, so IntelliSense in your editor can show you more context.

> <img src="/static/blog/mui-core-v5/prop-descriptions.png" alt="" style="width: 649px; margin-bottom: 16px;" />

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
<img src="/static/blog/mui-core-v5/prop-descriptions.png" alt="Screenshot of the added prop descriptions due to IntelliSense" style="width: 649px; margin-bottom: 16px;" />
```

We are happy to report that we have migrated **all** our test codebase to Testing Library.
You can use our tests as inspiration when you need to write new ones.
The migration has even allowed us to rethink some of the implementations, making the components easier to test with the library.

### TypeScript migration

The MUI Core codebase is not completely written in TypeScript yet but we have been coming a long way ([MUI X](https://github.com/mui-org/material-ui-x) is).
In v4, we have written all the demos TypeScript first.

With v5, we have made new steps toward the adoption of TypeScript:

- We have made the TypeScript definitions the source of the API pages.
  This reduces the likeliness for a new release to include out-of-date definitions.
- We have migrated our first component to be written in TypeScript.
- We are writing most of the new code in TypeScript.

Overall, the language stats of GitHub give some qualitative measure of the progress:

- 02/2019: 1.6%
- 03/2020: 3.2%
- 07/2020: 5.3%
- 10/2020: 25.4%
- 07/2021: 35.4%
- Today: 36.1%

> <img src="/static/blog/mui-core-v5/typescript.png" alt="" style="width: 310px; margin-bottom: 16px;" />

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
<img src="/static/blog/mui-core-v5/typescript.png" alt="Screenshot of our current language distribution. 36.1% TypeScript, 63.9% JavaScript." style="width: 310px; margin-bottom: 16px;" />
```

These changes have allowed us to save [6 kB gzipped](https://github.com/mui-org/material-ui/pull/22814#issuecomment-700995216) on the `@mui/material` package.

## Design kits

We now have the MUI components available in the three main design tools out there: Figma, Sketch, and Adobe XD. If you work together with a team of designers, having them using the UI kits makes for easier communication as you'll be speaking the same language around the components. It'll also help designers to understand how the library is structured, especially theming features and each component prop, enabling a much faster development.

## What's next?

Looking back, we are glad to say that, together, we have accomplished most of the objectives we defined in the [v4 release blog post](/blog/material-ui-v4-is-out/#whats-next).
We are also proud to share that currently we are at around 25% of market share in the React community. We aim to grow till around 50% by 2025.
This is an ambitious goal, but not impossible. We have managed to make this effort sustainable in the past, for example by introducing the [premium themes store](/blog/material-ui-v4-is-out/#premium-themes-store).

> In the following sections we are going to share our public roadmaps and the high level areas we plan to focus on.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the following sections, we share our public roadmaps and the high-level areas we plan to focus on.
```

(or "are sharing"? not sure about this one)

Reviewer 3: cc @mbrookes ?

### A public roadmap

You can use our GitHub project's roadmap to learn about what features we're working on, what stage they're at, and when we expect to bring them to you:

- [MUI Core](https://github.com/mui-org/material-ui/projects/25)
- [MUI X](https://github.com/mui-org/material-ui-x/projects/1)

We offer this transparency into what we plan to work on, so that you can plan better and share feedback earlier to influence what we’re building.

From high level perspective, we plan to focus in the upcoming period on the following topics:

- Core project:

>   - unstyled components and hooks, to push even further the customization level we offer for the components

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - unstyled components and hooks, to push the customization level of components even further
```

>   - second design system, that will help us grow MUI beyound Material Design

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - second design system, that will help us grow MUI beyond Material Design
```

- X project:

>   - continue our focus on the `DataGrid` component, by releasing the v5 stable release and developing more features

Reviewer 2: releasing the release :)

```suggestion
  - continue our focus on the `DataGrid` component, by releasing the stable 5.0 version and developing more features
```

Reviewer 3: It's all about release for me today 😄

  - expand to a second component as part of the X package

You can find more information about the new areas we are going to work on in the next sections.

### Unstyled components and hooks

To continue expanding on the customization effort, we plan to provide a version of the components that contain only the core functionality and accessibility support features, allowing you to add whatever styling strategy you wish. We're just starting and there's a lot of work to do to have a full set of unstyled components.

> You can keep track of our progress in [#27170](https://github.com/mui-org/material-ui/issues/27170).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can read more about them in [the docs](/customization/unstyled-components/) and keep track of our progress in [#27170](https://github.com/mui-org/material-ui/issues/27170).
```

Our high-level plan is to use the unstyled components and hooks as the basis of the Material components and second design system.
We are aiming to complete this work with the next major release (v6).
As of now, you can evaluate the unstyled primitives in the `@mui/base` package, or check out the next implementation of the Material Design components in the `@mui/material-next` package (targeted at v6).
Please note that both packages are in an alpha state so that we can release breaking changes –
we want to take the opportunity to create the best APIs we possibly can.

You can help us shape these new packages by taking part in discussions.
There are [RFCs](https://github.com/mui-org/material-ui/issues?q=is%3Aopen+label%3Adiscussion+%5BRFC%5D) waiting for responses.
Don't hesitate to let us know what you think!

### Second design system

> Developing a new design system is one of the main initiatives, alongside this new brand and the unstyled components, to grow MUI beyond Material Design. Its codename is **Joy** and we have just started [the high-level discussion](https://github.com/mui-org/material-ui/discussions/27803) around it if you want more context.

Reviewer 2: We have started the discussion no matter if the reader wants more context ;)

```suggestion
Developing a new design system is one of the main initiatives, alongside this new brand and the unstyled components, to grow MUI beyond Material Design. Its codename is **Joy** and we have just started [the high-level discussion](https://github.com/mui-org/material-ui/discussions/27803) around it.
```

It will be built on top of our foundation packages (the base/unstyled components and `@mui/system`) to provide a close DX and API as Material Design. We plan on having built-in CSS variables generated from the theme, a great dark mode API, a custom look and feel, and more.

We're prioritizing developing first the most frequently used components as we plan on releasing them continuously with each milestone. We intend on having on Joy all the components already available on Material Design so that developers can then pick between them focusing on the design they like the most. The main difference will be at the theme structure, where we want to achieve the right amount of flexibility while providing an amazing design by default.

We'll keep you updated about the progress. And as always, you're invited for contributing to it as well. Stay tuned!

### MUI X

```sh
- We will keep focusing on the data grid
- We will expend to a second component, once we hit a point of diminushing efficiency on the data  grid
```

## Thank you

Finally, one last thank you to everyone who's contributed to MUI Core v5.

> We have almost reached 6,000 commits on this effort, alone.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We have reached almost 6,000 commits on this effort alone.
```

- [Improved DX](#improved-dx)
  - [Smaller demos in the docs](#smaller-demos-in-the-docs)
  - [Props descriptions in IntelliSense](#props-descriptions-in-intellisense)
  - [Migration from Enzyme to Testing Library](#migration-from-enzyme-to-testing-library)
  - [TypeScript migration](#typescript-migration)
  - [Strict Mode support](#strict-mode-support)
- [A new product line: X](#a-new-product-line-x)
  - [Data Grid](#data-grid)
  - [Date Picker](#date-picker)
- [New components](#new-components)
  - [Improved Grid](#improved-grid)
  - [More Material Design icons](#more-material-design-icons)
  - [Stack](#stack)
  - [Promotion from the lab](#promotion-from-the-lab)
  - [New in the lab](#new-in-the-lab)
- [v4 migration](#v4-migration)
  - [Change of the package names](#change-of-the-package-names)
  - [Change of the styling solution](#change-of-the-styling-solution)
  - [Change on the supported platforms](#change-on-the-supported-platforms)
- [Design kits](#design-kits)
- [What's next?](#whats-next)
  - [A public roadmap](#a-public-roadmap)
  - [Unstyled components and hooks](#unstyled-components-and-hooks)
  - [Second design system](#second-design-system)

>   - [MUI X](#mui-x)

Reviewer 6: Is this section meant as a table of contents? If so, let's double check before merging that it's up-to-date

Reviewer: Done and one issue found

Overall, the language stats of GitHub give some qualitative measure of the progress:

- 02/2019: 1.6%
- 03/2020: 3.2%
- 07/2020: 5.3%
- 10/2020: 25.4%
- 07/2021: 35.4%
- Today: 36.1%

<img src="/static/blog/mui-core-v5/typescript.png" alt="Screenshot of our current language distribution. 36.1% TypeScript, 63.9% JavaScript." style="width: 310px; margin-bottom: 16px;" />

We expect the adoption of TypeScript to increase during the lifecycle of v5.
With this organic adoption strategy, it might take us two years to close [#15984](https://github.com/mui-org/material-ui/issues/15984).

### Strict Mode support

This release is compatible with `React.StrictMode`.
This is the result of two years of work on the infrastructure.
We now run the tests and the documentation in strict mode.
Thanks for the patience, this has been an old and [frequently requested](https://github.com/mui-org/material-ui/issues/13394) improvement.

Bonus point, we run [React v18](https://github.com/reactwg/react-18) (unreleased) in a nightly build, in strict mode, without any test failures.

> ⚠️ `@mui/styles` is not compatible with strict mode nor concurrent features.

## A new product line: X

```sh

> - What's the problem solved by MUI X, what's the difference
> - Why it's a new product line

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
The MUI X product line will contain all future commercial components and all the components that we can't sustain with the open-source model. MUI X is our next iteration in scaling MUI, both as a company and as a comprehensive React library of components.
```

> - What's the problem solved by MUI X, what's the difference
> - Why it's a new product line
> - How it's made sustainable

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
The MUI X product line will contain all future commercial components and all the components that we can't sustain with the open-source model. MUI X is our next iteration in scaling MUI, both as a company and as a comprehensive React library of components.
```

> - What's available in it. Present the new Data Grid component

Reviewer 7: Regarding the presentation - should we have a video/gif or a simple image?

```suggestion
Currently, the available components in MUI X are the `DataGrid` and `DataGridPro`.
```

Also what about `DatePicker`, `DateTimePicker` and `DateRangePicker`?

Reviewer 3: cc @oliviertassinari for the first part.

> Also what about DatePicker, DateTimePicker and DateRangePicker?

These are currently in the Core, so I am not sure if we should mention them here for now.

Reviewer 3: @DanailH how about we go with an image to ilustrate this? Also, we could add a link to the new X Product page so that people can take a look at.

Reviewer 7: That would work. We can add a screenshot of the full feature demo here https://next.material-ui.com/components/data-grid/demo/ and link to the overview page https://next.material-ui.com/components/data-grid/ ?

Reviewer 3: Sounds good to me. @danilo-leal what are your thoughts?

Reviewer 4: I'm in. A quick gif would be cool! @DanailH can you get it?

Reviewer 4: Done in: https://github.com/mui-org/material-ui/pull/27912/commits/459826092d83ce8012cd4c99cb23f4cbd66f5795

```

### Data Grid

```sh

> - What's the ambition with the component

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
We have started the `DataGrid` and `DataGridPro` components more than a year ago with the ambition to deliver the best-in-class React data grid. To achieve this we have a twin licensing model. The `DataGrid` component is available under an MIT license for the features that can be relatively easily implemented, and that can be sustained with an open-source model. The `DataGridPro` on the other hand is available under a paid commercial license for the more advanced features.
```

Reviewer 3: Pushed with new lines per sentence, to help review.

- Do a quick presentation of what's available
- Covered a bit in https://material-ui.com/blog/2020-q3-update/
```

### Date Picker

We have transferd the ownership of the `@material-ui/pickers` from [Dmitriy Kovalenko](https://github.com/dmtrKovalenko) to the main organization.
They are now part of the `@mui/lab` package.

We spent a lot of time on making sure they are consistent and have the same level of exelence as the other core components.
It is interesting that these components are the first TypeScript components we have in the project.

> At this moment they are on the border between the Core and the X project. It is too hard to maintain them as part of the Core, but on the other hand they are too popular and widely used to be in the X. We will keep investigating on what would be the best place for them in the upcoming period.

Reviewer 6: > @eps1lon would be great if you can take a look on the Date Picker section I've just added with [61eddf3](https://github.com/mui-org/material-ui/commit/61eddf38ae5a20337a055141fd46ce23682436a0)

Looks good.

Our high-level plan is to use the unstyled components and hooks as the basis of the Material components and second design system.
We are aiming to complete this work with the next major release (v6).
As of now, you can evaluate the unstyled primitives in the `@mui/base` package, or check out the next implementation of the Material Design components in the `@mui/material-next` package (targeted at v6).
Please note that both packages are in an alpha state so that we can release breaking changes –
we want to take the opportunity to create the best APIs we possibly can.

You can help us shape these new packages by taking part in discussions.
There are [RFCs](https://github.com/mui-org/material-ui/issues?q=is%3Aopen+label%3Adiscussion+%5BRFC%5D) waiting for responses.
Don't hesitate to let us know what you think!

### Second design system

Developing a new design system is one of the main initiatives, alongside this new brand and the unstyled components, to grow MUI beyond Material Design. Its codename is **Joy** and we have just started [the high-level discussion](https://github.com/mui-org/material-ui/discussions/27803) around it.

> It will be built on top of our foundation packages (the base/unstyled components and `@mui/system`) to provide a close DX and API as Material Design. We plan on having built-in CSS variables generated from the theme, a great dark mode API, a custom look and feel, and more.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It will be built on top of our foundation packages (the base/unstyled components and `@mui/system`) to provide the API shaped similarly to our Material Design components. We plan on having built-in CSS variables generated from the theme, a great dark mode API, a custom look and feel, and more.
```

> We're prioritizing developing first the most frequently used components as we plan on releasing them continuously with each milestone. We intend on having on Joy all the components already available on Material Design so that developers can then pick between them focusing on the design they like the most. The main difference will be at the theme structure, where we want to achieve the right amount of flexibility while providing an amazing design by default.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We're aiming for developing the most frequently used components first, as we plan on releasing them continuously with each milestone. We intend to have Joy versions of all components already available on Material Design so that developers can then pick between them, choosing the design they like the most. The main difference will be the theme structure, where we want to achieve the right amount of flexibility while providing an amazing design by default.
```

> We'll keep you updated about the progress. And as always, you're invited for contributing to it as well. Stay tuned!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We'll keep you updated about the progress. And as always, you're invited to contribute to it as well. Stay tuned!
```

   From our experience, maintaining a custom styling solution takes a considerable amount of time.

After [exploring](https://github.com/mui-org/material-ui/issues/22342) many different options, we settled on what we believe is a great tradeoff to **solve** the above issues:

1. We have made `styled` the lowest level primitive to add styles.
   This API is already known by many.
2. We have defined a common interface with concrete implementations:

   - `@mui/styled-engine`: implemented with emotion (default).
   - `@mui/styled-engine-sc`: implemented with styled-components
   - If you are using a different styling library, feel free to contribute a wrapper. For instance, there is [one attempt with goober](https://github.com/mui-org/material-ui/pull/27776), a library obsessing on bundle size (3kB gzipped).

   This allows developers to swap between different style engines. For example, styled-components users no longer need to bundle emotion **and** styled-component, nor do they need to configure the server-side rendering for each.
   How does the [swap work](/guides/styled-engine/#how-to-switch-to-styled-components)? The same way it does from React to Preact.

> 3. For the last couple of months, we have been [sponsoring](https://opencollective.com/emotion) emotion with a $100/month grant. We are now increasing this amount to $1,000/month. It's in our best interest to help ensure the library keeps pushing the envelope, leading the state of the art in a competitive space.

Reviewer 6: So happy about this 👍🏻

  This reduces the likeliness for a new release to include out-of-date definitions.
- We have migrated our first component to be written in TypeScript.
- We are writing most of the new code in TypeScript.

Overall, the language stats of GitHub give some qualitative measure of the progress:

- 02/2019: 1.6%
- 03/2020: 3.2%
- 07/2020: 5.3%
- 10/2020: 25.4%
- 07/2021: 35.4%
- Today: 36.1%

<img src="/static/blog/mui-core-v5/typescript.png" alt="" style="width: 310px; margin-bottom: 16px;" />

We expect the adoption of TypeScript to increase during the lifecycle of v5.
With this organic adoption strategy, it might take us two years to close [#15984](https://github.com/mui-org/material-ui/issues/15984).

### Strict Mode support

This release is compatible with `React.StrictMode`.
This is the result of two years of work on the infrastructure.
We now run the tests and the documentation in strict mode.
Thanks for the patience, this has been an old and [frequently requested](https://github.com/mui-org/material-ui/issues/13394) improvement.

Bonus point, we run [React v18](https://github.com/reactwg/react-18) (unreleased) in a nightly build, in strict mode, without any test failures.

> > ⚠️ `@mui/styles` is not compatible with strict mode nor concurrent mode.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
> ⚠️ `@mui/styles` is not compatible with strict mode nor concurrent features.
```

The term "concurrent mode" is no longer applicable: https://github.com/reactwg/react-18/discussions/64

  <a href="/components/masonry/"><img src="/static/blog/mui-core-v5/masonry.png" alt="" style="width: 505px; margin-bottom: 16px;" /></a>

## v4 migration

We have been meticulous to minimize the pain on the migration from v4 to v5. We know how daunting an upgrade can be.

We have used all the tools at our disposal.
We have documented all the breaking changes, we have added as many deprecations as we could, we wrote codemods to automate the laborious tasks, and more!

If you are starting your upgrade, these are the three things you should look into:

- ⚓ We have introduced actionable deprecations in v4.
  You can upgrade to v4.12.0 and start preparing your codebase to be compatible with v5.
- ⚒️ We have prepared a [codemod](/guides/migration-v4/#preset-safe) that does most of the transformations you will need for the migration.
  If you are not familiar with what a codemod is, check out [Effective Refactoring with Codemods by Edd Yerburgh](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=H9qtLutnT_g&ab_channel=Pusher).
- 📄 Lastly, we have prepared a step-by-step [migration guide](/guides/migration-v4/).
  This guide is the one place where you can find all information required for upgrading to v5.

> 

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
- We've [worked with the React core team to make React devtools display warnings](https://github.com/facebook/react/pull/20463) directly in the components panel. This should make it easier to find where components need to be updated for v5: https://github.com/facebook/react/blob/main/packages/react-devtools/CHANGELOG.md#expose-dev-mode-warnings-in-devtools-ui
```

In the following sections we are going to share our public roadmaps and the high level areas we plan to focus on.

### A public roadmap

You can use our GitHub project's roadmap to learn about what features we're working on, what stage they're at, and when we expect to bring them to you:

- [MUI Core](https://github.com/mui-org/material-ui/projects/25)
- [MUI X](https://github.com/mui-org/material-ui-x/projects/1)

We offer this transparency into what we plan to work on, so that you can plan better and share feedback earlier to influence what we’re building.

From high level perspective, we plan to focus in the upcoming period on the following topics:

- Core project:
  - unstyled components and hooks, to push the customization level of components even further
  - second design system, that will help us grow MUI beyond Material Design
- X project:
  - continue our focus on the `DataGrid` component, by releasing the stable 5.0 version and developing more features
  - expand to a second component as part of the X package

You can find more information about the new areas we are going to work on in the next sections.

### Unstyled components and hooks

> To continue expanding on the customization effort, we plan to provide a version of the components that contain only the core functionality and accessibility support features, allowing you to add whatever styling strategy you wish. We're just starting and there's a lot of work to do to have a full set of unstyled components.

Author: ```suggestion
To continue improving the customization experience, we are doubling down on the version of the components without styles.
These components and hooks contain the main functionalities and accessibility, without being opinionated about how styles are applied nor what styles.
We still have work to do to have a full set of unstyled components.
```

> You can read more about them in [the docs](https://mui.com/customization/unstyled-components/) and keep track of our progress in [#27170](https://github.com/mui-org/material-ui/issues/27170).

Author: ```suggestion
You can read more about them in [the docs](/customization/unstyled-components/) and keep track of our progress in [#27170](https://github.com/mui-org/material-ui/issues/27170).
```

We now run the tests and the documentation in strict mode.
Thanks for the patience, this has been an old and [frequently requested](https://github.com/mui-org/material-ui/issues/13394) improvement.

Bonus point, we run [React v18](https://github.com/reactwg/react-18) (unreleased) in a nightly build, in strict mode, without any test failures.

> ⚠️ `@mui/styles` is not compatible with strict mode nor concurrent features.

## A new product line: X

<img loading="lazy" src="/static/blog/mui-core-v5/mui-x-blog-hero.png" alt="Mockup of some MUI X components" style="width: 700px; margin-bottom: 16px;" />

We are very excited to introduce a new product line to the MUI family: [**MUI X**](/x/)!
We have recently released our [first stable version](https://github.com/mui-org/material-ui-x/releases/tag/v4.0.0).

MUI X embodies our initiative to solve the main pain point developers have reported two years in a row during our developer's survey: [2020](/blog/2020-developer-survey-results/#5-how-can-we-improve-material-ui-for-you), [2019](/blog/2019-developer-survey-results/#4-how-can-we-improve-material-ui-for-you).
We have heard you, you want **more components**.

> In practice, there are so many different components that you might need that, our team can't cover it all.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
But, in practice, to cover the many possible components you might need, we would need an even bigger team to do it. 
```

I got what you were trying to say but found it to be a little confusing, maybe now it's a bit clearer?!

Instead, we are focusing on the **hardest** and **most requested** components, leaving the long tail to our [community of contributors](/discover-more/related-projects/#components).

We started working on this effort over a year ago, in a new GitHub repository: [mui-org/material-ui-x](https://github.com/mui-org/material-ui-x).

> You might wonder, why work on it as a different product? We quickly realized that the team working on MUI X would need to become, at least, two times larger than the team working on MUI Core.
> Building a great data grid or charting solution takes a considerable amount of time.
> And yet, focusing on MUI Core is **foundamental** for the adoption of MUI.
> 
> You can see this separation of purpose more clearly from the vision and mission statmemnts of the two products:
> 
> - **MUI Core**:
>   - Vision: Create robust foundations to build UI components. "robust" is measured by how many developers decided to depend on it.
>   - Mission: Unlock design skills to the developers while allowing them to build UIs fast.
> - **MUI X**:
>   - Vision: Create the last UI component library developers will ever need. High quality, consistent, feature-rich, and covering the most frequent/challenging use cases.
>   - Mission: Make building rich, data intensive dynamic apps a breeze.
> 
> Taking on the mission MUI X also required to make a major change to our monetization strategy.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
You might wonder, why work on it as a different product? Building a great data grid or charting solution takes a considerable amount of time. Taking on the challenge of developing them required us to think about a different monetization strategy and we quickly realized that the team working on MUI X would need to become, at least, two times larger than the one working on MUI Core, which already has the community contribution. 

Although each product has its unique vision and mission statements, they complement each other. A solid MUI Core foundation is essential for the MUI X adoption. 

- **MUI Core:**
- Vision: Create robust foundations to build UI components. "Robust" is measured by how many developers decide to depend on it. 
- Mission: Unlock design skills to developers while allowing them to build UIs fast.
- **MUI X:**
- Vision: Create the last UI component library developers will ever need. High quality, consistent, feature-rich, and covering the most frequent/challenging use-cases.
- Mission: Make building rich, data-intensive, dynamic apps a breeze.
```

Just to have the narrative a bit clearer, I think it all comes down to answering the question posed. Let me know what you think!

MUI Core has a positive cashflow thanks to its paid templates, design assets, ads on the documentation, and backers/sponsors (❤️). The [MIT](https://tldrlegal.com/license/mit-license) license model works great for it.

However, none of these revenue sources would scale with the outcome and amount of work required for MUI X.

> It's why we are using an open core license model for this new product.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
It's why we are using an [open core license model](https://medium.com/open-consensus/2-open-core-definition-examples-tradeoffs-e4d0c044da7c) for this new product.
```

I personally was not aware of what open-core meant 😅 Here's a cool post I found while researching it, it might be useful for some people.

We have started the `DataGrid` and `DataGridPro` components more than a year ago with the ambition to deliver the best-in-class React data grid.

To achieve this we have a twin licensing model.
The `DataGrid` component is available under an MIT license for the features that can be relatively easily implemented, and that can be sustained with an open-source model.
The `DataGridPro` on the other hand is available under a paid commercial license for the more advanced features.

<a href="/components/data-grid/demo/"><img loading="lazy" src="/static/blog/mui-core-v5/data-grid.gif" alt="Screen recording of the Data Grid component demo" style="width: 700px; margin-bottom: 16px;" /></a>

<a href="/components/data-grid/demo/"><p class="blog-description">Check the Data Grid demo here.</p></a>

### Date Picker

We have transferred the ownership of the `@material-ui/pickers` from [Dmitriy Kovalenko](https://github.com/dmtrKovalenko) to the main organization.
The [picker components](/components/pickers/) are now part of the `@mui/lab` package.

We spent a lot of time making sure they are consistent.
We are now working toward reaching the same level of excellence as the other core components.

> These were our first TypeScript component in the codebase.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
These were our first TypeScript components in the codebase.
```

## High-level goals for v5

In our last survey, the number of developers that commented about improving the Material Design implementation was down by [60%](https://mui.com/blog/2020-developer-survey-results/#comparison-with-last-year) compared to the year before.
At the same time, 5X more developers were struggling to customize the components.

It is based on this context that we started to work on v5 in 2019.
Our primary focus was to revamp the **customization Developer Experience (DX)**.
It had become clear that design (aesthetic, UX) and DX were key to unlocking the next stage of growth.

The last major iteration on the library was completed with v4, released [two-and-a-half years ago](https://mui.com/blog/material-ui-v4-is-out/),
meaning over a year without innovation.
So, we have approached v5 with a focus on delivering **long-term value**.
For instance, we stopped all development on v4 as soon as we started to work on v5,
and have taken the liberty of introducing breaking changes anytime we have identified a long-term upside.

You can find the initial RFC plan for v5 in [issue #20012](https://github.com/mui-org/material-ui/issues/20012).

## A new brand

> Material-UI **is now MUI**! Head to the [dedicated blog post](https://mui.com/blog/material-ui-is-now-mui/) to learn more.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Material-UI is now **MUI**! Head to the [dedicated blog post](https://mui.com/blog/material-ui-is-now-mui/) to learn more.
```

<a href="https://mui.com/store/#design"><img loading="lazy" src="/static/blog/mui-core-v5/design-kits.png" alt="Screenshot of buttons in the Figma design kit" style="width: 700px; margin-bottom: 16px;" /></a>

<p class="blog-description">The design kits</p>

Figma is the first design kit that benefits from the v5 update, and we're more excited than ever to get the kits into designers' hands! We understand that designers are generally more creative and productive when their physical and digital work environment is looking fresh — that is why our kits are now cleaner in every aspect, leveraging naming, easy component-showcasing, and consistency.

Some major changes to the components:

- We’ve added the new colors that v5 introduces (error, warning, info & success)
- All new components are covered
- States such as hover have been added for all relevant components

## What's next?

Looking back, we are glad to say that, together, we have accomplished most of the objectives we defined in the [v4 release blog post](https://mui.com/blog/material-ui-v4-is-out/#whats-next).

> We are also proud to share that the monetization initiatives we have started right after the release of v4 are working, e.g. [the store](/blog/material-ui-v4-is-out/#premium-themes-store-✨). We have incorporated a company two years ago, grown between x2-3 a year since, and are now over 10 people at the company with a positive cashflow 🚀. We are on track to reach 16 people by December 2021.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We are also proud to share that the monetization initiatives we have started right after the release of v4 are working, e.g. [the store](/blog/material-ui-v4-is-out/#premium-themes-store-✨). We have incorporated the company two years ago, grown between x2-3 a year since, and we're now over 10 people with a positive cashflow 🚀. We are on track to reach 16 people by December 2021.
```

> We are also proud to share that the monetization initiatives we have started right after the release of v4 are working, e.g. [the store](/blog/material-ui-v4-is-out/#premium-themes-store-✨). We have incorporated a company two years ago, grown between x2-3 a year since, and are now over 10 people at the company with a positive cashflow 🚀. We are on track to reach 16 people by December 2021 .

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We are also proud to share that the monetization initiatives we have started right after the release of v4 are working, e.g. [the store](/blog/material-ui-v4-is-out/#premium-themes-store-✨). We have incorporated a company two years ago, grown between x2-3 a year since, and are now over 10 people at the company with a positive cashflow 🚀. We are on track to reach 16 people by December 2021.
```

> We are also proud to share that the monetization initiatives we have started right after the release of v4 are working, e.g. [the store](/blog/material-ui-v4-is-out/#premium-themes-store-✨). We have incorporated a company two years ago, grown between x2-3 a year since, and are now over 10 people at the company with a positive cashflow 🚀. We are on track to reach 16 people by December 2021 .

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
We are also proud to share that the monetization initiatives we have started right after the release of v4 are working, e.g. [the store](/blog/material-ui-v4-is-out/#premium-themes-store-✨). We have incorporated the company two years ago, grown between x2-3 a year since, and we're now over 10 people with a positive cashflow 🚀. We are on track to reach 16 people by December 2021 .
```

Reviewer 3: Updated.

> [We are hiring](/careers/) for growing our existing producs, but also to explore a bold new product vertical, aligned with or mission.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[We are hiring](/careers/) for growing our existing products, but also to explore a bold new product vertical, aligned with our mission.
```

We couldn't be more grateful for the trust that the React community put in us.

> On average, we won 4% of market share in the React community, every year.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
On average, we won 4% of market share in the React community every year.
```

### Core

#### Unstyled components and hooks

> 

Reviewer 5: A small description of what are the unstyled components or at least a link to a place introducing them could be nice

> We still have a lot of work to do to have a great set of unstyled components.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
We still have a lot of work to do to have a full set of unstyled components.
```

Unless we want to remain imprecise to avoid complains if we don't create the unstyled version of some components.

### A public roadmap

> You can use our GitHub's quarterly public roadmap to learn about what features we're working on, what stage they're at, and when we expect to bring them to you:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can use our public roadmap on GitHub to learn about what features we're working on, what stage they're at, and when we expect to bring them to you:
```

From a high level perspective, we plan to focus in the upcoming period on the following topics:

- Core product:

>   - unstyled components and hooks, we want to continue improving the customization experience

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Unstyled components and hooks. We want to continue improving the customization experience.
```

>   - second design system, that will help us grow MUI beyond Material Design

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - A second design system, that will help us grow MUI beyond Material Design.
```

- X product:

>   - focus on the data grid component, by releasing the stable 5.0 version and developing the advanced features in our roadmap

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Focus on the data grid component, by releasing the stable 5.0 version and developing the advanced features in our roadmap.
```

>   - expand to a second component once the data grid is on the right path

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Expand to a second component once the data grid is on the right path.
```

### MUI X

> The data grid is the cornerstone of any application manipulating data. We plan to focus on it as long as necessary to deliver most of the advanced features.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The data grid is the cornerstone of any application manipulating large amounts of data. We plan to focus on it as long as necessary to deliver most of the advanced features.
```
